Opening the Door to Great Bliss
An Aspiration Towards the Realm of Abhirati
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru vajra-akṣobhyāya!1

di né shar gyi chok kyi namkha la
In the space to the east of here lies
shying gi chokgyur ngönpar gawa shyé
The supreme realm known as Abhirati.
pakyé yönten rinchen ter gyi dzö
To that precious treasury of boundless qualities,
ngotsar köpa samyé la chaktsal
Unimaginably wondrous in design, I pay homage.

tadru rab yang ta na ngönpar duk
Vast and expansive, delightful to behold,
rinchen na dün riwo kö lek shing
It has mountains like the seven precious emblems;
ser gyi sa shyi tadru yang shing nyam
Its golden ground is extensive and even,
lha yi metok silmar kheng la dü
And strewn with divine flowers—to this place I bow.

changchub jönshing rinchen drawa dang
Here there are bodhi trees, jewels all interwoven,
tashi gewé tsen tak chiryang tra
And everywhere clear signs of good fortune.
lha yija tsok ké nyen rab drok ching
Divine birds call out in the sweetest song,
gangla chi dö ngang gi jung la dü
And wishes are spontaneously fulfilled—to this place I bow.

trü kyi khangpa nyamgé dzingbu dang
There are bathhouses, delightful pools,
kyemö tsal chen norbü dram tek kyi
And great pleasure gardens, all surrounded
guna ta ré yongsu korwa dang
By an abundance of jewelled platforms
langchen tal kar sok kyi gangla dü
And thronged with the supreme pale elephant and other beasts—to this place I bow.

bai dur ngönpo namkhé dang ö kyi
There is a three-storied palace that shines
künné khyüpé shyalmé khang sum tsek
In the radiant light of the lapis-blue sky,
ser dang pé rak bé ngön gya pib tser
And its roof of gold, ruby and sapphire2
dorjé norbü tok gi dzé la dü
Is decorated with a jewelled vajra—to this place I bow.

dé ü langpö tekpé rinchen trir
In its centre, on a jewelled throne supported by elephants,
natsok pema dawé kyilkhor teng
A multi-coloured lotus and the maṇḍala of a moon,
gyalwa mi truk gönpo ö tayé
Is the victorious Akṣobhya, the lord of limitless light,
tsenpé ziji pal du bar la dü
Dazzling and resplendent with the signs and marks—to whom I bow.

ku la chögö nam sum dzepar lub
He is dressed in the three dharma robes;
ku dang shyal ni natsok chiryang gyur
His body and face adopt various forms.
longchö yongsu dzokpé daknyi chen
He is the epitome of perfect enjoyment.
dorjé sempa mi kyö gyal la dü
To the vajra-like victor Akṣobhya I bow.

ku yi özer chenpö chotrul dang
His magical form emanates extensive rays of light;
sung yang dzemé shyingkham küntu drok
His unending melodious speech sounds in all realms;
tuk ni ösal namkha drima mé
His mind of clear light is as immaculate as the sky;
yönten trinlé sam mikhyab la dü
His qualities and activity defy the imagination—to him I bow.

gyalsé pö kyi langpo lasokpa
To the vast retinue, as infinite as the ocean,
trulpé nyenrang changsem pakpé tsok
Including the victor’s heir Gandhahastin,3
gya bö khé dang drub rik gyatso yi
Hosts of emanated noble śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas,
khor tsok gyatso ting tami ngön dü
As well as scholars and adepts from India and Tibet, I bow.

denam kün kyang wangpo nönpo dang
They all possess the most acute of faculties;
jorpa nyam shying ku yi özer gyi
Their wealth is equal; and light from their forms
tong kham khyabpé münpé gokab mé
Fills the universe to leave no chance of darkness.
kyé ga na chi bakchak pang la dü
To those who lack the habits of birth, old age, sickness and death, I bow.

sangwa tünmin dorjé rik kyi khor
The retinue of the uncommon secret vajra family
shyi dang trowö rol gar tayé shing
Is limitless in its display of peaceful and wrathful guises.
pawo daki jewa saya dang
To those who display the dance of vajra emanations
lhenchik dorjé rol gar tön la dü
Together with many billions of vīras and ḍākinīs, I bow.

tekchen gyundré chökhor taktu kor
The Wheel of Mahāyāna teachings on causality is forever turning.
dukngal ming tsam mi drak dechen shying
Even the name of suffering is unknown in this land of great bliss.
tingdzin go gya juk dang kechik tön
Hundreds of samādhi doors are entered and exited in an instant.
shying shyen sangye changsem lhak la dü
To this superior realm of buddhas and bodhisattvas, I bow.

dedak nam dang chö kyi drowa dzé
With them you discourse upon the Dharma,
kechik kalpa shyingkham gyatsor juk
And enter oceans of realms and aeons in an instant.
kutsé kalpa chenpo bumtrak chu
Your lifespan is ten times a hundred thousand great aeons.
zab dang gyaché chö tön dzé la dü
To you who teach the profound and vast Dharma, I bow.

ma ong nyangdé tsé na trulpé ku
In future, as you enter parinirvāṇa, your nirmāṇakāya emanations
tongsum khyabpé chö tön sa chen yo
Will teach the Dharma throughout the threefold universe, the ground will shake,4
kudung dumbu tro lé tashi yib
Sacred relics will appear and auspiciously shaped
jung shyi chörten gyepar gyur la dü
Stūpas of the four elements will emerge—to you I bow.

shyedang khongtrö tawé tripa sok
For beings of the six classes afflicted by karma,
dro druk lé kyi narwé kyendro nam
Such as those caught up in anger and aversion,
khyö tsen dren dang zung ngak tong tsam gyi
The mere thought of your name or sight of your mantra
kalpar sakpé ledrib jang la dü
Is enough to purify karma and obscurations gathered in an aeon—to you I bow.

chö kyi dütsi zekmé shé tsam gyi
With even a few droplets of Dharma’s nectar
drowa pakmé changchub la gö ching
You bring countless beings to the level of awakening,
dedak dü kyi dzimé men minjung
Whence, invulnerable to Māra, they cannot be brought down.
tab tob mönlam yeshe dzok la dü
To you, whose means, strength, aspirations and wisdom are all complete, I bow.

ngöntsé gelong chö kyi gocha yi
In the past, as the bhikṣu Dharmavarman
tukkyé mönlam tabpé rang dré kyi
You set your mind upon awakening and made prayers of aspiration,
sangye kün lé trinlé ché lhakpé
As a result of which your activity is supreme among all the buddhas.
mi truk gönpö shyab la chaktsal dü
To you, Lord Akṣobhya, I bow down in homage.

ngepé döndu tönpa né dang khor
In reality, the teacher, the place and the retinue,
chö dang dü nam peldrib kündral shying
The Dharma and the time are all invariable.
mizé gyen gyi khorlo tak ching khyab
To the unending wheel of adornment—eternal, pervasive,
lhündrub sam jödral bé ngowor dü
Spontaneous, inconceivable and inexpressible—I bow.

detar güpé tö ching soldeb dang
Like this, I offer praise and call out to you in prayer.
ngöjor yitrul chöpé trin gyi chö
I present offering clouds of real and imagined riches.
tserab sakpé diktung tamché shak
I confess all misdeeds and downfalls from every life.
khordé gewa kün la jé yi rang
I rejoice in every virtue within saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.

chö kyi khorlo gyachen korwar kul
I implore you to turn the Wheel of Dharma extensively.
nya ngen mi da takpar shyuk soldeb
I beseech you not to pass into nirvāṇa but remain forever.
dü sum gé tsok drowa kün la ngo
I dedicate all the virtues of the three times to all beings.
ngönpar gawé shying du kyewar shok
May they all be reborn in this realm of Abhirati!

dak dang dak la drelpa tob tsé nam
For me and all who have a connection with me,
namshyik uk ni chepar gyurpa na
As soon as our breathing ceases, at that moment,
lama chomden dorjé mi trukpa
May the guru and blessed one Vajra Akṣobhya
ngönsum jön neshying der tripar shok
Come to us directly and lead us to this realm.

kyé ma tak tu sangye shyal tong shying
As soon as we take birth there, may we behold the Buddha’s face,
damchö nyen té dzok min jang tarchin
Hear the sacred Dharma, and master perfecting, maturing and purifying.
tar ni mi kyö gön dang yermé ching
Ultimately, may we become indivisible from Lord Akṣobhya himself
trulpé chok chur drowé dönjé shok
And through emanations bring benefit to beings in all the ten directions.

gyalwa mi truk gönpö tukkyé dang
The victorious Lord Akṣobhya’s decision to awaken,
dzepa mönlam khyen tsé nü pé tsul
His activity, aspirations, knowledge, love and power,
lamé yeshe gyutrul chindrawa
His magical manifestation of unsurpassable wisdom—
dendra khonar dak sok gyurwar shok
May and I others come to have them too, just as they are.

lha dang chepé jikten tadak gi
With the supporting realm of Akṣobhya, who is supreme guide
drenpa chokgyur chomden mi trukpé
For all the world, including the devas, and the supported inhabitants
shyingkham ten dang tenpa yi khar kö
Established clearly in the space of my mind,
dul nyé lü ji trul té gön chaktsal
I emanate bodies as numerous as atoms and prostrate to this protector.

rangshyin trulpé shying ngar nangwé shyi
In the knowledge that the nature of the supreme realm
nying ü dangpé melong yeshe kyi
Of Abhirati manifests within the light channel
ö tsar nangwé ngöngé shying chok gi
Of subtle mirror-like wisdom at the centre of my heart,
rangshyin yongsu shepé chak gyi o
The basis for the appearance of the five naturally emanated purelands, I prostrate.

dü dé jewa trak trik dak gi kyang
Donning the armour that remains unyielding
mi truk köpé gocha rab gö shing
Even in the onslaught of māras by the billion,
tob chü wangchuk deshyin shekpé tso
I prostrate before the glorious Akṣobhya-vajra,
palden mi kyö dorjé la chaktsal
Foremost of tathāgatas, lords of tenfold power.

gang ngön deshek chen chenpo yi drung
In the past, in the presence of the sugata Mahācakṣu,
shyen gyi pé dar mepé tukkyé shyé
You developed an enlightening resolve unmatched by others,
chepa chö tsé shyen gyi nösem kyi
And while carrying out activity, you remained supremely
mi yo chok tu tenpar dzé la dü
Immovable5 in the face of others’ malice—to you I bow.

I, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, was inspired by faith and devotion to write these verses of aspiration.
May this become a cause for me and all other sentient beings, who are as infinite in
number as space is vast, to be reborn in the realm of Abhirati. Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Sources:
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "mngon dga'i zhing gi smon lam bde chen sgo 'byed/" in gsung
'bum/_'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros/ (dbu med/). 8 vols. Gangtok: Dzongsar Khyentse Labrang,
1981–1985 (BDRC W21813). Vol. 4: 473–479
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "mngon dga'i zhing gi smon lam bde chen sgo 'byed/" in 'Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986.
Vol. 12: 363–369
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "mngon dga'i zhing gi smon lam bde chen sgo 'byed/" In blo gros
mtha' yas (ed.). rin chen gter mdzod chen mo/. New Delhi: Shechen Publications, 2007–2008.
Vol. 48: 487–492.

Version: 1.0-20220107
↑ Both the dbu med and dbu can editions have vajra-akṣobhe while the Shechen edition of the
rin chen gter mdzod has vajra-akṣobhyaḥ.↑ Reading bad sngon as dbang sngon.↑ The bodhisattva
who will become Akṣobhya’s successor.↑ On the miracles that accompany the conclusion of
Akṣobhya’s career see Jan Nattier, "The Realm of Akṣobhya" in Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies, 23.1, 2000, pp. 71–102.↑ Here, Jamyang Khyentse plays upon
the literal meaning of Akṣobhya. On Akṣobhya’s training see Nattier, op. cit., pp. 85–87.